About The Authors
==================

**Larry Peterson** is the Robert E. Kahn Professor of Computer
Science, Emeritus at Princeton University, where he served as Chair
from 2003-2009. His research focuses on the design, implementation,
and operation of Internet-scale distributed systems, including the
widely used PlanetLab and MeasurementLab platforms.  He is currently
leading the CORD and Aether access-edge cloud projects at the Open
Networking Foundation (ONF), where he serves as CTO.  Peterson is a
member of the National Academy of Engineering, a Fellow of the ACM and
the IEEE, the 2010 recipient of the IEEE Kobayashi Computer and
Communication Award, and the 2013 recipient of the ACM SIGCOMM
Award. He received his Ph.D. degree from Purdue University in 1985.

**Carmelo Cascone** is a Member of the Technical Staff at the Open
Networking Foundation (ONF), where he currently leads technical
activities around the adoption of programmable switches, P4, and
P4Runtime in ONF projects such as ONOS, CORD, and Aether. Cascone
received a Ph.D. from Politecnico di Milano in 2017, in a joint
program with École Polytechnique de Montréal. He is broadly interested
in computer networks and systems, with a focus on data plane
programmability and Software-Defined Networking (SDN).

**Brian O'Connor** is a Member of the Technical Staff at the Open
Networking Foundation (ONF), where he currently leads technical
activities around the adoption of switch operating systems. O'Connor
received a BS and MS in Computer Science from Stanford Univesity in
2012 and 2013, respectively.

**Thomas Vachuska** is Chief Architect at the Open Networking
Foundation (ONF), where he leads the ONOS project. Before joining ONF,
Vachuska was a Software Architect at Hewlett-Packard. Vachuska
received a BA in Mathematics from California State
University-Sacramento in 1994.

**Bruce Davie** is a computer scientist noted for his contributions to
the field of networking. He is a former VP and CTO for the Asia
Pacific region at VMware. He joined VMware during the acquisition of
Software Defined Networking (SDN) startup Nicira. Prior to that, he
was a Fellow at Cisco Systems, leading a team of architects
responsible for Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS). Davie has over
30 years of networking industry experience and has co-authored 17
RFCs. He was recognized as an ACM Fellow in 2009 and chaired ACM
SIGCOMM from 2009 to 2013. He was also a visiting lecturer at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology for five years. Davie is the
author of multiple books and the holder of more than 40 U.S. Patents.

