About The Authors
==================

**Larry Peterson** is the Robert E. Kahn Professor of Computer
Science, Emeritus at Princeton University, where he served as Chair
from 2003-2009. He is a co-author of the best selling networking
textbook *Computer Networks: A Systems Approach (6e)*, which is now
available as open source on GitHub. His research focuses on the
design, implementation, and operation of Internet-scale distributed
systems, including the widely used PlanetLab and MeasurementLab
platforms.  He is currently leading the CORD and Aether access-edge
cloud projects at the Open Networking Foundation (ONF), where he
serves CTO.  Professor Peterson is a member of the National Academy of
Engineering, a Fellow of the ACM and the IEEE, the 2010 recipient of
the IEEE Kobayashi Computer and Communication Award, and the 2013
recipient of the ACM SIGCOMM Award. He received his Ph.D. degree from
Purdue University in 1985.

**Carmelo Cascone** is a Member of the Technical Staff at the Open
Networking Foundation (ONF), where he currently leads technical
activities around the adoption of programmable switches, P4, and
P4Runtime in ONF projects such as ONOS, CORD, and Aether. Cascone
received a Ph.D. from Politecnico di Milano in 2017, in a joint
program with École Polytechnique de Montréal. He is broadly interested
in computer networks and systems, with a focus on data plane
programmability and Software-Defined Networking (SDN).

**Brian O'Connor** is a Member of the Technical Staff at Open Network
is a Member of Technical Staff at the Open Networking Foundation
(ONF), where he currently leads technical activities around the
adoption of switch operating systems. O'Connor received a BS and MS
in Computer Science from Stanford Univesity in 2012 and 2013,
respectively.

**Thomas Vachuska** is Chief Architect at the Open Networking
Forundation (ONF), where he leads the ONOS project. Before joining ONF,
Vachuska was a Software Architect at Hewlett-Packard. Vachuska
received a BA in Mathematics from California State
University-Sacramento in 1994.

